



Network Working Group                                          A. Farrel
Internet-Draft                                        Old Dog Consulting
Intended status: Informational                                    K. Yao
Expires: 17 October 2026                                    China Mobile
                                                               R. Schott
                                                        Deutsche Telekom
                                                             N. Williams
                                                                Infoblox
                                                           15 April 2026


 Terminology for the Discovery of Agents, Workloads, and Named Entities
                                 (DAWN)
                    draft-farrel-dawn-terminology-00

Abstract

   The proliferation of distributed systems, Artificial Intelligence
   (AI) agents, cloud workloads, and network services has created a need
   for interoperable mechanisms to discover entities across
   administrative and network boundaries.  Entities may include AI
   agents, software services, compute workloads, and other named
   resources that need to be found and characterised before interaction
   can begin.

   This document defines terminology for Discovery of Agents, Workloads,
   and Named Entities (DAWN).  The intention is that this common set of
   terms can be used by other documents related to DAWN and so achieve
   consistency of meaning across the space.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 17 October 2026.





Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Privacy Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   6.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   7.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Modern distributed systems increasingly rely on the dynamic
   composition of services, agents, and workloads that may not have pre-
   configured relationships.  For example, an AI agent may need to find
   another agent with specific capabilities, a workload orchestrator may
   need to locate compute resources in a particular jurisdiction, or a
   service consumer may need to discover providers that support a
   required protocol version.  Further use cases and scenarios are
   expected to be documented separately.

   In each case, an entity needs knowledge of remote entities before
   interaction can proceed: what they are, what they offer, and whether
   they can be trusted.  Such knowledge could be obtained through static
   configuration, but this approach is impractical at scale and across
   organisational boundaries.  Automated discovery mechanisms are
   therefore needed.

   Today, where automated discovery exists, it is typically handled
   through proprietary directories or platform-specific mechanisms.
   These approaches do not scale across organisational boundaries and
   create fragmented ecosystems where entities cannot find entities
   managed by other organisations.



Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


   An interoperable discovery mechanism is needed that builds on
   existing protocols and tools, benefits from an established trust
   model, supports proven delegation and federation architectures, and
   allows organisations to independently publish discovery information.

   This document defines common terminology for use in documents that
   discuss Discovery of Agents, Workloads, and Named Entities (DAWN).

2.  Terminology

   The terms presented in this section are in alphabetic order for ease
   of reference.  For those wishing to read this document to gain an
   understanding of the DAWN scenery, if it recommended to read the
   terms in the order presented in Figure 1.

            | Core term    | Subsidiary term                  |
            |--------------|----------------------------------|
            | Entity       |                                  |
            |              | Named Entity                     |
            |              | Agent                            |
            |              | Workload                         |
            |              | Task                             |
            |              | Discovering Entity               |
            |              | Discovered Entity                |
            | Discovery    |                                  |
            |              | Discoverable Object              |
            |              | Minimum Discoverable Information |
            |              | Discovery Mechanism              |
            | Capability   |                                  |
            |              | Function                         |
            |              | Attributes                       |
            |              | Properties                       |
            |              | Capability Card                  |
            |              | Trust Indicator                  |
            | Registration |                                  |
            |              | Registrar                        |
            |              | Discoverable Object Validation   |
            | Selection    |                                  |

                Figure 1: Key DAWN Terms in a Readable Order

   Agent:  An entity that acts autonomously or semi-autonomously on
      behalf of a user, organisation, or system.  An agent may initiate
      interactions with other entities, make decisions, and perform
      tasks.  AI agents are a specific class of agent that employ
      artificial intelligence techniques.

   Attributes:  The properties, features, capabilities, skills, etc.,



Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


      that an entity possess or may have access to such as capabilities,
      skill type, communication language, capacity, task description,
      contact information, ID, etc.  (See also, properties.)

   Capability:  A description of the functions, services, or actions
      that an entity can perform.  Capabilities may be described using
      structured schemas such as capability cards.

   Capability Card:  A structured, machine-readable description of an
      entity's capabilities and interface.  Variants include agent
      cards, task cards, resource cards, tool cards, and skill cards
      depending on the type of entity.

   Capability Exchange:  The processes by which entities exchange
      details of what they can do, dynamic status information, and which
      particular features or functions they wish to engage.  Capability
      exchange and negotiation are out of scope for DAWN, but will form
      an essential part of selection and operation of agents.

   Discoverable Object:  An information object that is discoverable and
      includes information that defines what an entity is, what
      attributes it possess, how to reach to the associated entity, etc.
      May be represented as a capability card.

   Discoverable Object Validation:  The process that verifies a
      discoverable object, ensures its compliance to standards, and
      makes it available to the discovery substrate.

   Discovered Entity:  An entity whose properties are returned as the
      result of a discovery query.  A discovered entity may be a
      specific instance or a member of a class of entities that can
      perform a desired function.

   Discovering Entity:  An entity (or its operator) that initiates the
      discovery process in order to find other entities to interact
      with.

   Discovery:  The process by which an entity or its operator locates
      other entities that are capable of performing a desired function
      or providing a desired service, and obtains sufficient information
      to initiate interaction.

   Discovery Mechanism:  A protocol, system, or method used to perform
      discovery.  Examples include DNS-based service discovery,
      directory services, and distributed registries.

   Entity:  A system component that communicates with other entities in




Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


      a peer-to-peer or client-server relationship.  Entities include,
      but are not limited to, AI agents, tools, skills, tasks, compute
      workloads, software services, task owners, network functions, and
      application endpoints.

   Function:  The functional processing capability that an entity
      offers.  Examples include task execution, data transformation,
      inference, routing, storage, and orchestration.

   Minimum Discoverable Information (MDI):  The minimum amount of
      information an entity needs to provide to become discoverable.
      Think of it as common header of a data structure.

   Named Entity:  An entity that is identified by a stable name within a
      naming system.  The naming system may be hierarchical (e.g., the
      Domain Name System (DNS)) or flat.

   Properties:  The discoverable characteristics of an entity.
      Properties include, but are not limited to, communication
      protocols, capability cards, location, trust indicators, and
      operational status.

   Registrar:  An entity or system responsible for accepting and
      maintaining records about entities that wish to be discoverable.

   Registration:  The steps by which agents can register their existence
      with a registrar.  This should include attestation and other
      security mechanisms.  Registration is out of scope for DAWN, but
      the information that can be discovered and the trust with which
      that information is treated are key to any complete system.

   Selection:  The mechanisms and policies by which an entity determines
      which discovered entities it will interact with.  Selection is out
      of scope for DAWN, but depends on information obtained through
      discovery.

   Task:  A legacy term kept for continuity with earlier work.  A task
      may be considered as software service.

   Trust Indicator:  Information associated with an entity that allows a
      discovering party to assess the trustworthiness or provenance of
      the entity and its advertised properties.  Examples include
      digital signatures, certificates, and attestations.

   Workload:  A unit of compute or processing that is deployed and
      executed within a hosting environment.  Workloads may be transient
      or long-lived and may move between hosting environments.




Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not make any requests of IANA.

4.  Security Considerations

   This document only defines a set of terms.  It does not introduce any
   issues that require security consideration.

5.  Privacy Considerations

   This document only defines a set of terms.  It does not introduce any
   issues that require privacy consideration.

6.  Operational Considerations

   This document only defines a set of terms.  It does not introduce any
   issues that require operational consideration.

7.  Acknowledgements

   The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of participants in
   the DAWN discussions that shaped this document.

   Jim Mozley provided a useful review of this document.

Authors' Addresses

   Adrian Farrel
   Old Dog Consulting
   United Kingdom
   Email: adrian@olddog.co.uk


   Kehan Yao
   China Mobile
   China
   Email: yaokehan@chinamobile.com


   Roland Schott
   Deutsche Telekom
   Germany
   Email: Roland.Schott@telekom.de







Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              DAWN Terminology                  April 2026


   Nic Williams
   Infoblox
   United States of America
   Email: nwilliams@infoblox.com















































Farrel, et al.           Expires 17 October 2026                [Page 7]
